doc/ppx-for-plugin-authors.rst, before:

**********************
PPX for plugin authors
**********************

This section describes how to use ``ppxlib`` for PPX plugin authors.

Getting started
---------------

There are two main kinds of PPX plugins you can write with ``ppxlib``:

- Extension rewriters i.e. ppx plugins that rewrite extension points such as ``[%my_ext ...]``
  into valid OCaml code.
- Derivers i.e. ppx plugins that generate code from type, module or exception declarations
  annotated with ``[@@deriving my_deriver]``.

It is also possible to write more advanced transformations such as rewriting constants that bear the
right suffix, rewriting function calls based on the function identifier or to generate code from
items annotated with a custom attribute but we won't cover those in this section.

Note that you can also write arbitrary, whole AST transformations with ppxlib but they don't blend
in so well and you should always prefer the above mentioned transformations instead when possible.

Writing an extension rewriter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To write your ppx plugin you'll need to add the following stanza in your dune file:

.. code:: scheme

   (library
    (public_name my_ppx_rewriter)
    (kind ppx_rewriter)
    (libraries ppxlib))

You'll note that you have to let dune know this is not a regular library but a ppx_rewriter using
the ``kind`` field.
The public name you chose here is the name your users will refer to your ppx in there ``preprocess``
field. E.g. here to use this ppx rewriter one would add the ``(preprocess (pps my_ppx_rewriter))``
to their ``library`` or ``executable`` stanza.

You will also need the following ``my_ppx_rewriter.ml``:

.. code:: ocaml

   open Ppxlib

   let expand ~ctxt payload =
     ...

   let my_extension =
     Extension.V3.declare
       "my_ext"
       <extension_context>
       <ast_pattern>
       expand

   let rule = Ppxlib.Context_free.Rule.extension my_extension

   let () =
     Driver.register_transformation
       ~rules:[rule]
       "my_ext"

There are a few things to explain here. The last part, i.e. the call to
``Driver.register_transformation`` is common to almost all ppxlib-based PPX plugins and is how
you let ppxlib know about your transformation. You'll note that here we register a single rule
but it is possible to register several rules for a single logical transformation.

The above is specific to extension rewriters. You need to declare a ppxlib ``Extension``.
The first argument is the extension name, that's what will appear after the ``%`` in the extension
point when using your rewriter, e.g. here this will transform ``[%my_ext ...]`` nodes.
The ``<extension_context>`` argument describes where in OCaml code your this extension can be used.
You can find the full list in the API documentation for ``Extension.Context``
`here <https://ocaml-ppx.github.io/ppxlib/ppxlib/Ppxlib/Extension/Context/index.html>`.
The ``<ast_pattern>`` argument helps you restrict what users can put into the payload of your
extension, i.e. ``[%my_ext <what goes there!>]``. We cover ``Ast_pattern`` in depths here but the
simplest form it can take is ``Ast_pattern.__`` which allows any payload allowed by the language
and passes it to the expand function which is the last argument here.
The expand function is where the logic for your transformation is implemented. It receives an
``Expansion_context.Extension.t`` argument labelled ``ctxt`` and other arguments whose type and
number depends on the ``<ast_pattern>`` argument. The return type of the function is determined
by the ``<extension_context>`` argument, e.g. in the following example:

.. code:: ocaml

   Extension.V3.declare "my_ext" Extension.Context.expression Ast_pattern.__ expand

The type of the ``expand`` function is:

.. code:: ocaml

   val expand : ctxt: Expansion_context.Extension.t -> payload -> expression

Writing a deriver
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similarly to extension rewriters, derivers must be declared as such to dune. To do so you can use
the following stanza in your dune file:

.. code:: scheme

   (library
    (public_name my_ppx_deriver)
    (kind ppx_deriver)
    (libraries ppxlib))

Same as above, the public name used here determines how users will refer to your ppx deriver in
their dune stanzas.

You will also need the following ``my_ppx_deriver.ml``:

.. code:: ocaml

   open Ppxlib

   let generate_impl ~ctxt (rec_flag, type_declarations) =
     ...

   let generate_intf ~ctxt (rec_flag, type_declarations) =
     ...

   let impl_generator = Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg generate_impl

   let intf_generator = Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg generate_intf

   let my_deriver =
     Deriving.add
       "my_deriver"
       ~str_type_decl:impl_generator
       ~sig_type_decl:intf_generator


The call to ``Deriving.add`` is how you'll let ``ppxlib`` know about your deriver. The first string
argument is the name of the deriver as referred to by your users, in the above example one would add
a ``[@@deriving my_deriver]`` annotation to use this plugin.
Here our deriver can be used on type declarations, be it in structures or signatures (i.e.
implementation or interfaces, ``.ml`` or ``.mli``).

To add a deriver you first have to define a generator. You need one for each node you want to derive
code from. Here we just need one for type declarations in structures and one for type declarations in
signatures. To do that you need the ``Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg`` constructor. You'll note
that there exist ``Deriving.Generator.V2.make`` variant if you wish to allow passing arguments to
your deriver but to keep this tutorial simple we won't cover this here.
The only mandatory argument to the constructor is a function which takes a labelled
``Expansion_context.Deriving.t``, an ``'input_ast`` and returns an ``'output_ast`` and that will
give us a ``('output_ast, 'input_ast) Deriving.Generator.t``. Much like the ``expand`` function
described in the section about extension rewriters, this function is where the actual implementation
for your deriver lives.
The ``str_type_decl`` argument of ``Deriving.add`` expects a
``(structure, rec_flag * type_declaration list) Generator.t`` so our ``generate_impl`` function
must take a pair ``(rec_flag, type_declaration list)`` and return a ``structure`` i.e. a
``structure_item list``, for instance a list of function or module declaration.
The same goes for the ``generate_intf`` function except that it must return a ``signature``.
It is often the case that a deriver has a generator for both the structure and signature variants
of a node. That allows users to generate the signature corresponding to the code generated by the
deriver in their ``.ml`` files instead of having to type it and maintain it themselves.

Metaquot
--------

``metaquot`` is a PPX plugin that helps you write PPX plugins. It lets you write AST node values
using the actual corresponding OCaml syntax instead of building them with the more verbose AST types
or ``Ast_builder``.

To use ``metaquot`` you need to add it to the list of preprocessor for your PPX plugin:

.. code:: scheme

          (library
           (name my_plugin_lib)
           (preprocess (pps ppxlib.metaquot)))

``metaquot`` can be used both to write expressions of some of the AST types or to write patterns to
match over those same types. The various extensions it exposes can be used in both contexts,
expressions or patterns.

The extension you should use depends on the type of AST node you're trying to write or to
pattern-match over. You can use the following extensions with the following syntax:

- ``expr`` for ``Parsetree.expression``: ``[%expr 1 + 1]``
- ``pat`` for ``Parsetree.pattern``: ``[%pat? ("", _)]``
- ``type`` for ``Parsetree.core_type``: ``[%type: int -> string]``
- ``stri`` for ``Parsetree.structure_item``: ``[%stri let a = 1]``
- ``sigi`` for ``Parsetree.signature_item``: ``[%sigi: val i : int]``
- ``str`` and ``sig`` respectively for ``Parsetree.structure`` and ``Parsetree.signature``. They use
  similar syntax to the ``_item`` extensions above as they are just a list of such items.

If you consider the first example ``[%expr 1 + 1]``, in an expression context, ``metaquot`` will
actually expand it into:

.. code:: ocaml

          {
            pexp_desc =
              (Pexp_apply
                 ({
                    pexp_desc = (Pexp_ident { txt = (Lident "+"); loc });
                    pexp_loc = loc;
                    pexp_attributes = []
                  },
                   [(Nolabel,
                      {
                        pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                        pexp_loc = loc;
                        pexp_attributes = []
                      });
                   (Nolabel,
                     {
                       pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                       pexp_loc = loc;
                       pexp_attributes = []
                     })]));
            pexp_loc = loc;
            pexp_attributes = []
          }

For this to compile you need the AST types to be in the scope so you should always use ``metaquot``
where ``Ppxlib`` is opened.
You'll also note that the generated node expects a ``loc : Location.t`` value to be available. The
produced AST node value and every other nodes within it will be located to ``loc``. You should make
sure ``loc`` is the location you want for your generated code when using ``metaquot``.

When using the pattern extension, it will produce a pattern that matches no matter what the
location and attributes are. For the previous example for instance, it will produce the following
pattern:

.. code:: ocaml

          {
            pexp_desc =
              (Pexp_apply
                 ({
                    pexp_desc = (Pexp_ident { txt = (Lident "+"); loc = _ });
                    pexp_loc = _;
                    pexp_attributes = _
                  },
                   [(Nolabel,
                      {
                        pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                        pexp_loc = _;
                        pexp_attributes = _
                      });
                   (Nolabel,
                     {
                       pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                       pexp_loc = _;
                       pexp_attributes = _
                     })]));
            pexp_loc = _;
            pexp_attributes = _
          }

Using these extensions alone, you can only produce constant/static AST nodes. You can't bind
variables in the generated patterns either.
``metaquot`` has a solution for that as well: anti-quotation.
You can use anti-quotation to insert any expression or pattern representing an AST node.
That way you can include dynamically generated nodes inside a ``metaquot`` expression extension point
or use a wildcard or variable pattern in a pattern extension.

Consider the following example:

.. code:: ocaml

          let with_suffix_expr ~loc s =
            let dynamic_node = Ast_builder.Default.estring ~loc s in
            [%expr [%e dynamic_node] ^ "some_fixed_suffix"]

The ``with_suffix_expr`` function will create an ``expression`` which is the concatenation of the
``s`` argument and the fixed suffix. I.e. ``with_suffix_expr "some_dynamic_stem"`` is equivalent to
``[%expr "some_dynamic_steme" ^ "some_fixed_suffix"]``.

Similarly if you want to ignore some parts of AST nodes and extract some others when
pattern-matching over them, you can use anti-quotation:

.. code:: ocaml

          match some_expr_node with
          | [%expr 1 + [%e? _] + [%e? third]] -> do_something_with third

The syntax for anti-quotation depends on the type of the node you wish to insert:

- ``e`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.expression``: ``[%expr 1 + [%e some_expr_node]]``
- ``p`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.pattern``:
  ``[%pat? (1, [%p some_pat_node]]``
- ``t`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.core_type``:
  ``[%type: int -> [%t some_core_type_node]]``
- ``m`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.module_expr`` or ``module_type``:
  ``[%expr let module M = [%m some_module_expr_node]]`` or
  ``[%sigi: module M : [%m some_module_type_node]]``
- ``i`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.structure_item`` or ``signature_item``:
  ``[%str let a = 1 [%%i some_structure_item_node]]`` or
  ``[%sig: val a : int [%%i some_signature_item_node]]``

Note that when anti-quoting in a pattern context you must always use the ``?`` in the anti-quotation
extension as its payload should always be a pattern the same way it must always be an expression
in an expression context.

As you may have noticed, you can anti-quote expressions which type differs from the type of the
whole ``metaquot`` extension point. E.g. you can write:

.. code:: ocaml

          let structure_item =
            [%stri let [%p some_pat] : [%t some_type] = [%e some_expr]]

Commit message:

Clarify the difference between whole AST transformations and rules
Signed-off-by: Nathan Rebours <nathan.p.rebours@gmail.com>

doc/ppx-for-plugin-authors.rst, after:

**********************
PPX for plugin authors
**********************

This section describes how to use ``ppxlib`` for PPX plugin authors.

Getting started
---------------

There are two main kinds of PPX plugins you can write with ``ppxlib``:

- Extension rewriters i.e. ppx plugins that rewrite extension points such as ``[%my_ext ...]``
  into valid OCaml code.
- Derivers i.e. ppx plugins that generate code from type, module or exception declarations
  annotated with ``[@@deriving my_deriver]``.

It is also possible to write more advanced transformations such as rewriting constants that bear the
right suffix, rewriting function calls based on the function identifier or to generate code from
items annotated with a custom attribute but we won't cover those in this section.

``ppxlib`` compiles those transformations into rules which allows it to apply them to the right AST
nodes, even recurisvely in nodes generated by other transformations, in a single AST traversal.

Note that you can also write arbitrary, whole AST transformations with ppxlib but they don't have a
clear compisition semantic since they have to be applied sequentially as opposed to the
other, better defined rewriting rule. You should always prefer the above mentioned transformations
instead when possible.

Writing an extension rewriter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To write your ppx plugin you'll need to add the following stanza in your dune file:

.. code:: scheme

   (library
    (public_name my_ppx_rewriter)
    (kind ppx_rewriter)
    (libraries ppxlib))

You'll note that you have to let dune know this is not a regular library but a ppx_rewriter using
the ``kind`` field.
The public name you chose here is the name your users will refer to your ppx in there ``preprocess``
field. E.g. here to use this ppx rewriter one would add the ``(preprocess (pps my_ppx_rewriter))``
to their ``library`` or ``executable`` stanza.

You will also need the following ``my_ppx_rewriter.ml``:

.. code:: ocaml

   open Ppxlib

   let expand ~ctxt payload =
     ...

   let my_extension =
     Extension.V3.declare
       "my_ext"
       <extension_context>
       <ast_pattern>
       expand

   let rule = Ppxlib.Context_free.Rule.extension my_extension

   let () =
     Driver.register_transformation
       ~rules:[rule]
       "my_ext"

There are a few things to explain here. The last part, i.e. the call to
``Driver.register_transformation`` is common to almost all ppxlib-based PPX plugins and is how
you let ppxlib know about your transformation. You'll note that here we register a single rule
but it is possible to register several rules for a single logical transformation.

The above is specific to extension rewriters. You need to declare a ppxlib ``Extension``.
The first argument is the extension name, that's what will appear after the ``%`` in the extension
point when using your rewriter, e.g. here this will transform ``[%my_ext ...]`` nodes.
The ``<extension_context>`` argument describes where in OCaml code your this extension can be used.
You can find the full list in the API documentation for ``Extension.Context``
`here <https://ocaml-ppx.github.io/ppxlib/ppxlib/Ppxlib/Extension/Context/index.html>`.
The ``<ast_pattern>`` argument helps you restrict what users can put into the payload of your
extension, i.e. ``[%my_ext <what goes there!>]``. We cover ``Ast_pattern`` in depths here but the
simplest form it can take is ``Ast_pattern.__`` which allows any payload allowed by the language
and passes it to the expand function which is the last argument here.
The expand function is where the logic for your transformation is implemented. It receives an
``Expansion_context.Extension.t`` argument labelled ``ctxt`` and other arguments whose type and
number depends on the ``<ast_pattern>`` argument. The return type of the function is determined
by the ``<extension_context>`` argument, e.g. in the following example:

.. code:: ocaml

   Extension.V3.declare "my_ext" Extension.Context.expression Ast_pattern.__ expand

The type of the ``expand`` function is:

.. code:: ocaml

   val expand : ctxt: Expansion_context.Extension.t -> payload -> expression

Writing a deriver
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similarly to extension rewriters, derivers must be declared as such to dune. To do so you can use
the following stanza in your dune file:

.. code:: scheme

   (library
    (public_name my_ppx_deriver)
    (kind ppx_deriver)
    (libraries ppxlib))

Same as above, the public name used here determines how users will refer to your ppx deriver in
their dune stanzas.

You will also need the following ``my_ppx_deriver.ml``:

.. code:: ocaml

   open Ppxlib

   let generate_impl ~ctxt (rec_flag, type_declarations) =
     ...

   let generate_intf ~ctxt (rec_flag, type_declarations) =
     ...

   let impl_generator = Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg generate_impl

   let intf_generator = Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg generate_intf

   let my_deriver =
     Deriving.add
       "my_deriver"
       ~str_type_decl:impl_generator
       ~sig_type_decl:intf_generator


The call to ``Deriving.add`` is how you'll let ``ppxlib`` know about your deriver. The first string
argument is the name of the deriver as referred to by your users, in the above example one would add
a ``[@@deriving my_deriver]`` annotation to use this plugin.
Here our deriver can be used on type declarations, be it in structures or signatures (i.e.
implementation or interfaces, ``.ml`` or ``.mli``).

To add a deriver you first have to define a generator. You need one for each node you want to derive
code from. Here we just need one for type declarations in structures and one for type declarations in
signatures. To do that you need the ``Deriving.Generator.V2.make_noarg`` constructor. You'll note
that there exist ``Deriving.Generator.V2.make`` variant if you wish to allow passing arguments to
your deriver but to keep this tutorial simple we won't cover this here.
The only mandatory argument to the constructor is a function which takes a labelled
``Expansion_context.Deriving.t``, an ``'input_ast`` and returns an ``'output_ast`` and that will
give us a ``('output_ast, 'input_ast) Deriving.Generator.t``. Much like the ``expand`` function
described in the section about extension rewriters, this function is where the actual implementation
for your deriver lives.
The ``str_type_decl`` argument of ``Deriving.add`` expects a
``(structure, rec_flag * type_declaration list) Generator.t`` so our ``generate_impl`` function
must take a pair ``(rec_flag, type_declaration list)`` and return a ``structure`` i.e. a
``structure_item list``, for instance a list of function or module declaration.
The same goes for the ``generate_intf`` function except that it must return a ``signature``.
It is often the case that a deriver has a generator for both the structure and signature variants
of a node. That allows users to generate the signature corresponding to the code generated by the
deriver in their ``.ml`` files instead of having to type it and maintain it themselves.

Metaquot
--------

``metaquot`` is a PPX plugin that helps you write PPX plugins. It lets you write AST node values
using the actual corresponding OCaml syntax instead of building them with the more verbose AST types
or ``Ast_builder``.

To use ``metaquot`` you need to add it to the list of preprocessor for your PPX plugin:

.. code:: scheme

          (library
           (name my_plugin_lib)
           (preprocess (pps ppxlib.metaquot)))

``metaquot`` can be used both to write expressions of some of the AST types or to write patterns to
match over those same types. The various extensions it exposes can be used in both contexts,
expressions or patterns.

The extension you should use depends on the type of AST node you're trying to write or to
pattern-match over. You can use the following extensions with the following syntax:

- ``expr`` for ``Parsetree.expression``: ``[%expr 1 + 1]``
- ``pat`` for ``Parsetree.pattern``: ``[%pat? ("", _)]``
- ``type`` for ``Parsetree.core_type``: ``[%type: int -> string]``
- ``stri`` for ``Parsetree.structure_item``: ``[%stri let a = 1]``
- ``sigi`` for ``Parsetree.signature_item``: ``[%sigi: val i : int]``
- ``str`` and ``sig`` respectively for ``Parsetree.structure`` and ``Parsetree.signature``. They use
  similar syntax to the ``_item`` extensions above as they are just a list of such items.

If you consider the first example ``[%expr 1 + 1]``, in an expression context, ``metaquot`` will
actually expand it into:

.. code:: ocaml

          {
            pexp_desc =
              (Pexp_apply
                 ({
                    pexp_desc = (Pexp_ident { txt = (Lident "+"); loc });
                    pexp_loc = loc;
                    pexp_attributes = []
                  },
                   [(Nolabel,
                      {
                        pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                        pexp_loc = loc;
                        pexp_attributes = []
                      });
                   (Nolabel,
                     {
                       pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                       pexp_loc = loc;
                       pexp_attributes = []
                     })]));
            pexp_loc = loc;
            pexp_attributes = []
          }

For this to compile you need the AST types to be in the scope so you should always use ``metaquot``
where ``Ppxlib`` is opened.
You'll also note that the generated node expects a ``loc : Location.t`` value to be available. The
produced AST node value and every other nodes within it will be located to ``loc``. You should make
sure ``loc`` is the location you want for your generated code when using ``metaquot``.

When using the pattern extension, it will produce a pattern that matches no matter what the
location and attributes are. For the previous example for instance, it will produce the following
pattern:

.. code:: ocaml

          {
            pexp_desc =
              (Pexp_apply
                 ({
                    pexp_desc = (Pexp_ident { txt = (Lident "+"); loc = _ });
                    pexp_loc = _;
                    pexp_attributes = _
                  },
                   [(Nolabel,
                      {
                        pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                        pexp_loc = _;
                        pexp_attributes = _
                      });
                   (Nolabel,
                     {
                       pexp_desc = (Pexp_constant (Pconst_integer ("1", None)));
                       pexp_loc = _;
                       pexp_attributes = _
                     })]));
            pexp_loc = _;
            pexp_attributes = _
          }

Using these extensions alone, you can only produce constant/static AST nodes. You can't bind
variables in the generated patterns either.
``metaquot`` has a solution for that as well: anti-quotation.
You can use anti-quotation to insert any expression or pattern representing an AST node.
That way you can include dynamically generated nodes inside a ``metaquot`` expression extension point
or use a wildcard or variable pattern in a pattern extension.

Consider the following example:

.. code:: ocaml

          let with_suffix_expr ~loc s =
            let dynamic_node = Ast_builder.Default.estring ~loc s in
            [%expr [%e dynamic_node] ^ "some_fixed_suffix"]

The ``with_suffix_expr`` function will create an ``expression`` which is the concatenation of the
``s`` argument and the fixed suffix. I.e. ``with_suffix_expr "some_dynamic_stem"`` is equivalent to
``[%expr "some_dynamic_steme" ^ "some_fixed_suffix"]``.

Similarly if you want to ignore some parts of AST nodes and extract some others when
pattern-matching over them, you can use anti-quotation:

.. code:: ocaml

          match some_expr_node with
          | [%expr 1 + [%e? _] + [%e? third]] -> do_something_with third

The syntax for anti-quotation depends on the type of the node you wish to insert:

- ``e`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.expression``: ``[%expr 1 + [%e some_expr_node]]``
- ``p`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.pattern``:
  ``[%pat? (1, [%p some_pat_node]]``
- ``t`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.core_type``:
  ``[%type: int -> [%t some_core_type_node]]``
- ``m`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.module_expr`` or ``module_type``:
  ``[%expr let module M = [%m some_module_expr_node]]`` or
  ``[%sigi: module M : [%m some_module_type_node]]``
- ``i`` to anti-quote values of type ``Parsetree.structure_item`` or ``signature_item``:
  ``[%str let a = 1 [%%i some_structure_item_node]]`` or
  ``[%sig: val a : int [%%i some_signature_item_node]]``

Note that when anti-quoting in a pattern context you must always use the ``?`` in the anti-quotation
extension as its payload should always be a pattern the same way it must always be an expression
in an expression context.

As you may have noticed, you can anti-quote expressions which type differs from the type of the
whole ``metaquot`` extension point. E.g. you can write:

.. code:: ocaml

          let structure_item =
            [%stri let [%p some_pat] : [%t some_type] = [%e some_expr]]
